Update: namespace crash course (#27662)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/svg/namespaces_crash_course/index.md

{{SVGRef}}

As an [XML](/en-US/docs/Glossary/XML) dialect, [SVG](/en-US/docs/Web/SVG) is namespaced. It is important to understand the concept of namespaces and how they are used if you plan to author SVG content. Namespaces are essential to multi-XML dialect-supporting user agents; browsers must be very strict. Taking the time to understand namespaces now will save you from future headaches.

### Background

> The long-standing goal of the various W3C specification makes it possible for different types of XML-based content to be mixed together in the same XML or HTML file. For example, SVG and [MathML](/en-US/docs/Web/MathML) might be incorporated directly into an HTML based scientific document. Being able to mix content types like this has many advantages, but it also required a very real problem to be solved.

Reviewer: First sentence is not quite right.

```suggestion
A long-standing goal of the various W3C specifications is to make it possible for different types of XML-based content to be mixed together in the same XML or HTML file. For example, SVG and [MathML](/en-US/docs/Web/MathML) might be incorporated directly into an HTML based scientific document. Being able to mix content types like this has many advantages, but it also required a very real problem to be solved.
```

> Naturally, each XML dialect defines the meaning of the markup element names described in its specification. The problem with mixing content from different XML dialects in a single document is that the elements defined by one dialect may have the same name as elements defined by another. For example, both HTML and SVG have a `<title>` element. How does the user agent distinguish between the two? How do CSS styles distinguish between the two? In fact, how does the user agent tell when content is something it knows about, and not just a meaningless undefined HTML custom elements or an XML file containing arbitrary element names unknown to it?

Reviewer: I hate it when people put in arguable commas in my work. Very happy for you to ignore this if you feel the same way. Just felt a bit long. 

```suggestion
Naturally, each XML dialect defines the meaning of the markup element names described in its specification. The problem with mixing content from different XML dialects in a single document, is that the elements defined by one dialect may have the same name as elements defined by another. For example, both HTML and SVG have a `<title>` element. How does the user agent distinguish between the two? How do CSS styles distinguish between the two? In fact, how does the user agent tell when content is something it knows about, and not just a meaningless undefined HTML custom elements or an XML file containing arbitrary element names unknown to it?
```

> Contrary to popular opinion, the answer to this question is not "it can tell from the `DOCTYPE` declaration". DTDs were never designed with mixed content in mind, and past attempts to create mixed content DTDs are now considered to have failed. XML, and some XML dialects (SVG and HTML included), don't require a `DOCTYPE` declaration. SVG 1.2 doesn't even have one. The fact that `DOCTYPE` declarations (usually) match the content in single content-type files is merely coincidental. DTDs are for validation only, not identification of content. A user agents that cheats and identifies XML content using its `DOCTYPE` declaration would cause harm.

Reviewer: Just a suggestions. I don't like cheat or would cause harm.

```suggestion
Contrary to popular opinion, the answer to this question is not "it can tell from the `DOCTYPE` declaration". DTDs were never designed with mixed content in mind, and past attempts to create mixed content DTDs are now considered to have failed. XML, and some XML dialects (SVG and HTML included), don't require a `DOCTYPE` declaration. SVG 1.2 doesn't even have one. The fact that `DOCTYPE` declarations (usually) match the content in single content-type files is merely coincidental. DTDs are for validation only, not identification of content. Any user agents that identifies XML content using its `DOCTYPE` declaration is unreliable.
```

</svg>
```

The namespace declaration is provided by the `xmlns` parameter. This parameter says that the `<svg>` element and its child elements belong to whichever XML dialect has the namespace name `http://www.w3.org/2000/svg` which is, of course, SVG. Note that the namespace declaration is only provided once on a root element (and is implied if omitted). The declaration defines the _default_ namespace, so the user agent knows that all the `<svg>` element's descendants also belong to the same namespace. User agents check to see if they recognize the namespace name to determine if they know how to handle the markup.

> Note that namespace names are just strings, so the fact that the SVG namespace name also looks like a URI isn't important. URIs are commonly used because they are unique, the intention is not to "link" somewhere. (In fact, URIs are used so frequently that the term "namespace URI" is commonly used instead of "namespace name".)

Reviewer: I did not know that! I'd always wondered why rendering worked even if there was no fetch on the namespace URL.

#### Redeclaring the default namespace

> If all the descendants of the root element are also defined to be in the default namespace, how do you mix in content from another namespace? You redefine the default namespace! Here's a short example.

Reviewer 2: > You redefine the default namespace!

In HTML, now the default namespaces are always implied and they are *forced* (you can't declare your own default namespace in the markup). So this entire section, from HTML point of view, has no utility left.\
All it is doing now is asking developers to explicitly use `xmlns` attributes, which is not required.

I say we either
- remove the section `Redeclaring the default namespace` completely
- or make it discuss about XML, where it still applies:
	```xml
     <report xmlns="www.acme.org/reports>
         <title>Some stats</title>
         <summary>...</summary>

         <statTable xmlns="www.acme.org/tables>
               <content>...</content>
               <summary xmlns="www.acme.org/reports">...</summary> <!-- redeclaring root's default namespace -->
        </statTable>
     </report>
  ```

***

On MDN do we consider XML while discussing CSS? or just HTML?

</svg>
```

The namespace declaration is provided by the `xmlns` parameter. This parameter says that the `<svg>` element and its child elements belong to whichever XML dialect has the namespace name `http://www.w3.org/2000/svg` which is, of course, SVG. Note that the namespace declaration is only provided once on a root element (and is implied if omitted). The declaration defines the _default_ namespace, so the user agent knows that all the `<svg>` element's descendants also belong to the same namespace. User agents check to see if they recognize the namespace name to determine if they know how to handle the markup.

Note that namespace names are just strings, so the fact that the SVG namespace name also looks like a URI isn't important. URIs are commonly used because they are unique, the intention is not to "link" somewhere. (In fact, URIs are used so frequently that the term "namespace URI" is commonly used instead of "namespace name".)

#### Redeclaring the default namespace

> If all the descendants of the root element are also defined to be in the default namespace, how do you mix in content from another namespace? To include the SVG namespace in HTML, you include `<svg>`.  In XML, you declare a namespace. Here's a short example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If all the descendants of the root element are also defined to be in the default namespace, how do you mix in content from another namespace? To include the SVG namespace in HTML, you include `<svg>`. In XML, you declare a namespace. Here's a short example.
```

> ```html

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```xml
```

  <report xmlns="https://www.acme.org/reports">
      <title>Some stats</title>
      <summary>...</summary>

      <statTable xmlns="https://www.acme.org/tables">
            <content>...</content>
            <summary xmlns="https://www.acme.org/reports">...</summary> <!-- redeclaring root's default namespace -->
     </statTable>
  </report>
```

In this example, the `xmlns` attribute on the root `<report>` element declares the default namespace to be `https://www.acme.org/reports`, or `reports`. As a result, it and all its child elements are interpreted by the user agent as belonging to `reports`, except for the `<content>` element, which exists in the `https://www.acme.org/tables`, or `tables`, namespace. The `<summary>` element has its own `xmlns` parameter, and by redeclaring the `reports` namespace, this tells the user agent that the `<summary>` element and its descendants (unless they also redeclare an alternative namespace) belong to `reports`.

With HTML, `http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml` is the implied namespace. With SVG, it is `http://www.w3.org/2000/svg`. MathML is `http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML`.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

#### Declaring namespace prefixes

> XML dialects not only define their own elements, but also they also declare their own parameters.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
XML dialects not only define their own elements, but they also declare their own parameters.
```

By default, parameters don't have a namespace at all. They are only known to be unique because they appear on an element that itself has a unique name. However, sometimes it is necessary to define parameters so that they can be reused on many different elements and still be considered to be the same parameter, independently of the element with which they are used. A very good example of this is the `href` parameter defined by the {{glossary("XLink")}} specification. This parameter is commonly used by other XML dialects as a means to link to external resources. But how do you tell the user agent which dialect the parameter belongs to, in this case `XLink`? Consider the following example.

> ```html

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```xml
```

</svg>
```

> This example has the rather unusual-looking parameter `xmlns:xlink`. As you may guess from the first `xmlns` part, this is another namespace declaration. However, instead of setting the default namespace, this namespace declaration sets the namespace for something called a "[namespace prefix](/en-US/docs/Web/API/CSSNamespaceRule/prefix)". In this case, we have chosen to use the prefix `xlink` (the second part) since the prefix will be used to tell the user agent about attributes that belong to `XLink`.

Reviewer: Just FWIW, the namespace prefix link to a css rule on an SVG example looks a bit odd when reading the source. My assumption is that you chose this link and it makes sense to a reader.

Reviewer 3: I find this weird too, especially since the `prefix` page is very brief as well.

> As their name suggests, namespace prefixes are used to prefix parameter and element names. This is done by putting the namespace prefix and a colon before the parameter name as shown on the `<script>` element in the example above. This tells the user agent that the particular parameter belongs to the namespace assigned to the namespace prefix (`XLink`), and is a parameter that can be used with the same meaning on other elements.

Reviewer: Is it the "same meaning on other elements"? I understand that it is the same name, just confirming that if the same name is used in multiple specs it means the same thing.

          ><code>removeNamedItem()</code></a
        >
      </td>
      <td>
        <a
          href="/en-US/docs/Web/API/NamedNodeMap/removeNamedItemNS"><code>removeNamedItemNS()</code></a
        >
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <a
          href="/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/setAttribute"
          ><code>setAttribute()</code></a
        >
      </td>
      <td>
        <a
          href="/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/setAttributeNS"><code>setAttributeNS()</code></a
        >
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <a
          href="/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/setAttributeNode"
          ><code>setAttributeNode()</code></a
        >
      </td>
      <td>
        <a
          href="/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/setAttributeNodeNS"><code>setAttributeNodeNS()</code></a
        >
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <a
          href="/en-US/docs/Web/API/NamedNodeMap/setNamedItem"
          ><code>setNamedItem()</code></a
        >
      </td>
      <td>
        <a
          href="/en-US/docs/Web/API/NamedNodeMap/setNamedItemNS"><code>setNamedItemNS()</code></a
        >
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

> The first parameter for all the DOM2 namespace-aware methods must be the namespace name (also known as the namespace URI) of the element or parameter in question. For SVG **elements** this is `http://www.w3.org/2000/svg`. However, note carefully: the [Namespaces in XML 1.1](https://www.w3.org/TR/xml-names11/#defaulting) recommendation states that the namespace name for parameters without a prefix does not have a value. In other words, although the parameters belong to the namespace of the element, you do not use the tag's namespace name. Instead, **you must use null as the namespace name for unqualified (prefixless) parameters**. So, to create an SVG `rect` _element_ using `document.createElementNS()`, you must write:

Reviewer: I don't know what DOM2 is. If you think it is worth defining, a link might be good.

Probably also:

```suggestion
The first parameter for all the DOM2 namespace-aware methods must be the namespace name (also known as the namespace URI) of the element or parameter in question. For SVG **elements** this is `http://www.w3.org/2000/svg`. However, note carefully: the [Namespaces in XML 1.1](https://www.w3.org/TR/xml-names11/#defaulting) recommendation states that the namespace name for parameters without a prefix do not have a value. In other words, although the parameters belong to the namespace of the element, you do not use the tag's namespace name. Instead, **you must use null as the namespace name for unqualified (prefixless) parameters**. So, to create an SVG `rect` _element_ using `document.createElementNS()`, you must write:
```

          ><code>removeNamedItem()</code></a
        >
      </td>
      <td>
        <a
          href="/en-US/docs/Web/API/NamedNodeMap/removeNamedItemNS"><code>removeNamedItemNS()</code></a
        >
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <a
          href="/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/setAttribute"
          ><code>setAttribute()</code></a
        >
      </td>
      <td>
        <a
          href="/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/setAttributeNS"><code>setAttributeNS()</code></a
        >
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <a
          href="/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/setAttributeNode"
          ><code>setAttributeNode()</code></a
        >
      </td>
      <td>
        <a
          href="/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/setAttributeNodeNS"><code>setAttributeNodeNS()</code></a
        >
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <a
          href="/en-US/docs/Web/API/NamedNodeMap/setNamedItem"
          ><code>setNamedItem()</code></a
        >
      </td>
      <td>
        <a
          href="/en-US/docs/Web/API/NamedNodeMap/setNamedItemNS"><code>setNamedItemNS()</code></a
        >
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

> The first parameter for all the DOM2 namespace-aware methods must be the namespace name (also known as the namespace URI) of the element or parameter in question. For SVG **elements** this is `http://www.w3.org/2000/svg`. However, note carefully: the [Namespaces in XML 1.1](https://www.w3.org/TR/xml-names11/#defaulting) recommendation states that the namespace name for parameters without a prefix do not have a value. In other words, although the parameters belong to the namespace of the element, you do not use the tag's namespace name. Instead, **you must use null as the namespace name for unqualified (prefixless) parameters**. So, to create an SVG `rect` _element_ using `document.createElementNS()`, you must write:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The first parameter for all the DOM2 namespace-aware methods must be the namespace name (also known as the namespace URI) of the element or parameter in question. For SVG **elements** this is `http://www.w3.org/2000/svg`. However, note carefully: the [Namespaces in XML 1.1](https://www.w3.org/TR/xml-names11/#defaulting) recommendation states that the namespace name for parameters without a prefix does not have a value. In other words, although the parameters belong to the namespace of the element, you do not use the tag's namespace name. Instead, **you must use null as the namespace name for unqualified (prefixless) parameters**. So, to create an SVG `rect` _element_ using `document.createElementNS()`, you must write:
```
